Based on the 1989 U.S. National Health Interview Survey (NHIS), 3% of men and women age 18-44 years who reported having diabetes also reported having ischemic heart disease. This increased to 14% of those age 45-64 years and 20% of those age ≥65 years. The most common cause of death in adults with diabetes is coronary heart disease. The only national incidence data for the United States come from a 9-year follow-up of the 1971-75 First National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I), in which the age-adjusted death rate per 1,000 person-years was 28.4 for diabetic men and 10.2 for nondiabetic men age 40-77 years at baseline, and 10.5 and 4.1 for diabetic and nondiabetic women, respectively. The excess risk of heart disease occurs with both insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). In contrast to people without diabetes, heart disease in diabetic individuals appears earlier in life, affects women almost as often as men, and is more often fatal. As presented in Chapter 7, adults with diabetes are more likely than those without diabetes to have hypertension and dyslipidemia (low levels of high-density lipoprotein, HDL, and high levels of triglycerides and small dense low-density lipoprotein, LDL), but some of the increased risk of heart disease associated with diabetes appears to be independent of these factors. Insulin and glucose may act as cardiovascular disease risk factors, but data are inconsistent. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) found that improved control of blood glucose levels in young adults with IDDM reduced their risk of renal and retinal complications and may have also reduced their excess risk of heart disease. In contrast, preliminary results from the Feasibility Trial of the VA Cooperative Study on Glycemic Control and Complications in Type II Diabetes found an increased risk of cardiovascular events in insulin-treated patients with NIDDM. Further studies are needed to determine the role of insulin in the risk of cardiovascular disease.