The impact of environment on abnormal behavior and mental disease. environmental risk factors dates back to ancient times. Hippocrates (c. 460 – c. 370 BC) already associated mental disease with the constellation of the planets but also with nutrition and even developed treatment regimens based hereon. Not all environmental risk factors are founded on unequivocally or scientifically convincing data. They are often built on small numbers of individuals, are retrospective, and/or leave the “chicken or egg” question—whether they are the causes or consequences—unanswered. By way of example, the role of cannabis consumption as an inducer of schizophrenia, as self-medication during psychotic episodes or disease prodrome, or as a side effect of a problematic peer situation has been intensely discussed. It is quite safe to say that, despite there being some truth in all these views, cannabis can induce schizophrenia in predisposed individuals, lead to earlier disease onset in a dose-dependent manner, and trigger psychotic relapses [4]. Depending on an individual’s genetic make-up and environmental risk profile, cannabis consumption can also result in amotivational behavior, social withdrawal, or cognitive deficits upon peripubertal use. Traumatic brain injury has also been implicated as a risk factor for mental disease, but this possibility was only recently confirmed by a nationwide Danish study of 113,906 individuals who had suffered a neurotrauma. In fact, an injury to the head between 11 and 15 years of age is the strongest predictor for subsequent development of schizophrenia, depression, and bipolar disorder [5]. In contrast, season of birth is a weak risk factor per se, but if we consider that influenza infection has clear seasonal peaks and poses a high risk during pregnancy for the unborn child to develop mental disease, season of birth may ultimately prove valid as a risk factor. The influence of urbanicity on disease risk seems certain. But what are the exact reasons why the risk of abnormal behavior and mental disease increases if individuals grow up in an urban versus rural environment? The possible answers range from air pollution and noise to crowded living, problematic peers, and generally enhanced stress [6]. In order to understand more about the discrete individual risk factors that belong to urban environments, we would need to separate these as much as possible, as not all cities are crowded, not all are heavily polluted, and not all are noisy in the center. This would require large international efforts with unrestricted data and information sharing to compare cities regarding living conditions, the number and status of minorities and migrants, smog, and mental disease prevalence. Quality of housing would have to be measured as much as rush hour traffic, commuting possibilities and public transportation, or the availability of leisure activities and ways to relax to name just a few contributing factors of “urbanicity”. An extremely topical subject is migration as a risk factor of abnormal behavior and

Citation - 18
Ehrenreich, Hannelore. "The impact of environment on abnormal behavior and mental disease: To alleviate the prevalence of mental disorders, we need to phenotype the environment for risk factors." EMBO reports 18.5 (2017): 661-665.